You have two moments in the bibliophilae.
Yes, of course you have the beginning of the decouvert, but after you bought the books to read and to have the best lecture of one text.
Grosje, he don't bought the
the most rarest edition.
He bought the best philological text of one book.
But he bought not the first edition,
of Dante or he bought not the first edition of Petrarch.
He bought the best edition of the theological point of view.
Now you're talking about Goyer now, Jean Goyer.
Yes.
But of course he put beautiful bindings on them.
That's why we remember Grolier is for the bindings.
Isn't that right?
No, no, no.
Before exists the book and after exists the binding.
Grolier before bought a book and after he put on the book a binding.
When we speak about Grolier we must
speak of the man, but he choose a book.
He like a book and he put on the book a precious binding.
This is the process.
The process is not right on the binding.
This is nothing.
Why did he make such beautiful bindings then?
Because he loved the text, because he was a man of culture.
Because the great collector bought books and not shoe and not painting.
But the books have a text.
First of all, it's a text.
The concept of first editions wasn't an issue in those days.
That only lately has become an important consideration, as you just said.
Of the period of ecritism.
Yes.
If you want to have some idea of the bibliography, you must read the first, the Brunet, four
edition and the Brunet fifth edition.
In this period, change absolutely the complex, the complex, the fashion to look to the book because... I'm sorry.
If you look the old bibliography, also if you look Brunei, what he put?
The best edition.
And after he said, the
the book was printed the first time in a very bad lesson 100 years before.
Just in the half of 19th century with the exhibition of the great international exhibition
in Paris of 1950 that is just in this moment that you have the development of philology.
It's the first time that appear on the Boulton de Bibliophile in France.
two articles, very important, but he changed the spirit of the bibliophily and he said from this moment we must choose the first edition and the original binding.
But this is recent from
860, 880, before was the good text, not the first edition or the precious edition.
So it was the text.
It was the content.
The content always.
Only that in the past was a question of reading.
The best text of a philogenical point of view.
And after one epilology, matrisoformas, enata, come forma moderna, is born as a modern, as a modern, all in this moment, you, he, he, he,
He started the philological study on the text, the criticism on the text, and so it was not necessary to have the good edition.
But the interest was on a historical interest.
on the first edition, because the first edition is the edition that from his start, the thoughts, the idea and so on.
But the first, but nobody liked old binding.
The first exhibition exists in Paris in 1990, an album of old binding, 900.
It's the first time, but it's very rare that you find in old catalog notes on grid binding.
Yes, you know concrete binding, but very few of very, very important binding.
But not a little original binding, they don't exist.
And this, the first exhibition was in Edinburgh in 99.
The first in Italy, it was in Pitti in 26.
The first catalogue was in Paris.
and Morgan also that he made importance to the old banding, contemporary banding, but nobody before.
And this also because it is from this moment that the first edition was the edition that you prefer.
You chose the book, the great collector
You said as we were walking into the dining room that you learned bookselling in Paris.
Is that right?
Yes.
Could you tell me a little bit about that?
Could you tell me a little bit about your background, how you decided to become a bookseller?
Because I like books and so I live on the... I think that the good city was Paris.
And I lived for years on the trottoir and the bookshop.
But you said you're from Milano.
This is your home.
I mean, you were born here?
Yes, yes.
I was born in Milano, yes.
Is there a tradition of books in Milano?
Is there a long... Yes, in 19th century.
But my tradition of books, you must speak clear.
If you told me it's a tradition of books or it's a tradition of bibliophily,
Because there are two different things.
Of course it's a tradition of books.
You have a great patrimoine of books in Italy.
Of course.
It was the same as in France, as in perhaps most in 1970, during the Renaissance, during the Baroque, during the Rococo.
19th century not so much, 20th century nothing.
But the history of the Bibliophily... That's the question I think I meant.
The Bibliophily, we have a very good Bibliophily in 19th century, around the Trivulti, Omel, Zidane, all these people.
Milanese people.
Mostly Milanese.
And after you have a tradition also during this century in Florence.
De Marini, Gennari Conti, Feltrinelli.
So what kinds of things did you learn?
How does a person become
a scholarly bookseller.
The reason.
You want to know the reason?
Well, the reason or how you explain
the way you acquired your knowledge and your facility with books, your understanding.
No, listen.
Listen.
First, you, as a man, you have your emotions.
Emotions.
You have your emotions.
Very nice.
And your emotion you have first here.
Very often here.
You think first here, before here?
Yes, sometimes yes.
First here.
After here.
And after him.
After the I. And very important is the nose.
That's wonderful.
This is... What you're saying is that you... And after, if you love something, you want to know.
And you have your... Your brain, your... You love glass.
My father was a glass maker.
And so...
we have many of the objects of my father are in the museum, in the Corning Museum, in the Duomo di Milano, but what was it like glass and so he made a lot of objects because he loved and when you love something
You try to know about, you think about, you look.
This is the only... It's difficult to... No, that's wonderful, it's unique.
Have you ever heard an explanation like that?
It's not easy, I mean.
Sometimes it's difficult to...
to give a quick word and explanation of it.
It's difficult to explain you this not in my language or in French, you see.
But you cannot write on bibliothèes, bibliothèes,
If you don't look before the history of the bibliography, after you can understand a lot of questions.
But the love of the book was different in, but it was extremely
all changed in the half of the 19th century.
But it changed absolutely.
Now you say your father was a glassmaker here in Milan?
Yes.
And did he have a love?
Was he a bibliophile?
Did he impart a love of books?
A little, because he was a Muhammad Kultura.
Yes, a culture man.
Man, so he loved books, and he bought time to time some books, and this was a reason that also, but I was possibly for me to make the glass maker, or the book was just a little, because he was a culture man, and... At what point did you realize that you wanted
to make books your life.
Because it's not different.
You want to do something that you love.
If one man finds a world that he loves, this means that he corresponds to his character, his sensibility, his temperament.
And so, he has the possibility, he tries to transform what he loves also in an activity.
If you love flowers,
and you study flowers, botanicals.
And you like to live in the garden, you like to live, to make travel, to look strange flowers and so.
What is the most aspiration?
To make your business, your life,
on your passion.
Dedicated to your passion.
And so it was for me, from books.
I think I can say that you were very lucky to dedicate yourself to a passion, as a worker.
Sometimes it's not so easy, in fact, to dedicate not himself to the... One must work.
The man must work himself.
My son is a lawyer.
but he has this inclination when he has five years old, ten years old.
I was sure, we were sure that he was a lawyer.
Our son, you are thinking?
Yes.
I have four, my third one.
I have one, but it's also one, it was a little,
He liked economy and so is in a great American bank.
He worked in New York for American people and he liked immensely what he do.
Another he liked always from painting and so and he would be a dealer
in painting, but this is the experience.
Did you always... I think that everybody has to do what he wants, not obliged.
Is this something you always thought you wanted to do, to work with books?
Is this something that you always thought that you wanted to do?
No, before, but I...
Before to burn, no, but in one moment of my life I have seen books.
My father has a nice library, I look books, I like books, and they say, why not?
No.
These artichokes are the first of the season.
I follow the season.
I don't like to eat artichokes, but there are no season of artichokes.
Because now you have the habit to find everything, everywhere, in any time of day.
But it's not always the best.
No, but it's not, I mean.
Where do they grow them?
Are they from around?
I think they are Italian, yes.
Generally, I grow over in the south.
I thought that's so.
Yes.
In Vianitos, or in Sicily, or Roma.
Do you want to know?
You see, all is, sometimes in the, in the dipole, at the beginning it's difficult, because nobody arrives to find what he wants.
And this is, this is, it's a shame.
The best is one, one man can realize himself in what he likes.
How did you decide what kinds of books you wanted to specialize in?
Italian culture, of course.
In all its glory.
In all of its glory, all of Italian culture.
Of all sense, yes, but only books like documents, not bibliographies, philology, criticism, not books of study.
of our first edition, illustrated edition, typographical edition.
So, from the very beginning, you wanted to celebrate Italian culture.
Not from the first convenience, not the first.
You see,
One day came after one other day.
Every day is something new.
So little to little to have your taste, what you wish, what you can believe, what you understand.
And this is the formation, formazione, come si dice,
And so little to little you made your personality and your choice.
But I don't say the first day I want to do this.
Thank you.
First is the curiosity.
It's the curiosity.
First is to know.
First is to look.
First is this.
It's this.
First is
Sometimes you understand nothing and you have here something very stuck.
And so why?
And so little to little you try to
I am a self-made man, but all people are the self-made men.
You have chance to meet important people and to learn from important people.
I learned from a lot of people, but to every you can learn something.
The problem for a bookseller is not to buy what he can sell.
This is horrible.
Sometimes he must for a reason of necessity.
But the good bookseller is the bookseller that he made the choice and on the choice he made business.
But the business came after the choice.
So you make the decision on a book, on the merits of the book.
Yes, because I lie, because it corresponds to my mentality.
And after I try... No, no.
Yes, you know.
I don't know what it says in English.
Anyhow, try.
Go in... Yes.
Go deep.
Chateaunier.
Is it Chessnais?
Yes.
Chessnais, yes.
Oh, my goodness.
Thank you so much, really.
This is such a welcome and a treat, really.
Thank you.
Oh, my goodness.
I couldn't stay here.
I'm sorry, we were on to something there that was very...
Very interesting.
No, yes, you must buy what you like.
And after you will try, you study the book and you will try to find a man that can't correspond to this book and to sell him this book.
But you don't buy from
to sell.
Yes, of course.
But if I found, I don't know, some German books very important but are not in my spirit, I don't buy.
If I found American books I don't know about,
Yes, if I know the first proclamation and thought ten pounds, I know that this, he cost a little more and so I'm happy to buy, but... I think I'm all set, thank you.
Is it difficult to keep finding books of a quality to which you're accustomed?
Probably all the time, all our life.
If you see the quality of the books of Krauss, of Brazdao,
of great quality.
But also for these great booksellers, it was not easy to always.
Would you say that most of your clients are here in Italy?
No, they were.
Really?
In the States, in France, in Italy.
Do you do much business with institutions?
Yes.
Are they looking for rarity?
Or to go back to what you were saying earlier, or for significance or content, are they looking for a rare item?
I mean institutions in particular, actually.
They were rare, not exist.
It does not exist.
There are very few cases that exist.
In this sense,
But you don't buy a book because it's rare.
You buy a book and you sell the book because it's important.
If the book is also rare, it costs more or less.
But I never bought something because it's rare.
Because to the refogies, to these assets,
All the leaves and all the stones are rare.
All the stones are rare.
The stones are rare.
I didn't get the word.
I love that, stones.
Very rare case that rarity is a question that you buy for rarity question.
For instance, if you must collect an important collection, you must rebuild the life of Einstein or of Petra.
through his books and in this and so you try to have all what Petrarca has in print, all what Einstein has in print and so this is possible you have a little insignificant book of Einstein, of Petrarca that is extremely rare.
Although in this reason it's important to choose the rare also the books is
absolutely no importance because he goes to the reconstruction of the life of a man.
Do you understand what he means?
Yes, yes, yes.
But if
If I bought Civilization, for instance, I tried to have the first Copernicus.
But if I made a collection about Copernicus, also the first edition,
But I try to have also the little books insignificant of scientific importance against Copernico, what he was made just the year after the Revoluciones of Breterrano.
So in this case, the rarity of insignificant books
It's important because it's explained.
But when you see a book sale that you say rare books.
What do you mean rare books?
Rare books is the polyphilo.
You know the polyphilo?
Polyphilo.
Colonna.
Oh yes, okay.
It's not a rare book.
I don't know the... The first book of Fleming is not a rare book.
Of Einstein is not a rare book.
But it's much more important as a lot of
are the great books of our civilization.
Of course, if Einstein, the first... You don't claim the name of Einstein's book.
The first Einstein is very, very rare.
He costs a great, great price.
But your choice, your choice is not because it's rare.
Your choice because it's Einstein.
That's right.
The first book is not all that important.
Always, and always you must... Remember, the stone and the tree are rare.
And when you see a book sale that is rare books, what do you mean rare books?
Are little books that are not...
rare at all that are very important of the civilization.
Of course they are rare if many people want what only a few of them can have.
That makes it rare.
Yes, but you, of course, when you write you can say first edition very rare.
But I say that this is very rare.
He depends from the price, not for the choice.
You bought a book.
If you want, I can give you an incunabula, religioso or religious.
Religions of the predicate, the priest.
One copy only in the world.
If you want.
It's not rare, it's extremely rare because it's known.
Apparently known, only one copy.
One known copy.
One known cover.
But what pleasure can give you a so kind of book?
If this book is an important book, I Ragionamenti dell'Arettino.
Do you know what is Ragionamenti dell'Arettino?
Arettino, Pietro Arettino.
Of course.
He wrote a book very erotic.
but very interesting because it depends on all the culture of the Renaissance.
It's a book very important for the Renaissance.
Are known two copies, three copies, extremely rare.
Or so, perhaps four copies.
So if you have
from a side, this Incunabula Unique of this priest of Venice and the Ragionamenti dell'Arettino.
What you choose?
Gli Ragionamenti dell'Arettino, not the
because the Regenamento de la Retina, you have an important document of a civilization, of the other, unique.
Yet you can say I have a unique book, but all is unique.
Oh, I have a great collection of drawing.
All are unique.
And the books, unique, most...
We don't want to take up too much of your time, by the way, either, because I know that... Thank you so much.
This was quite wonderful.
Your first lunch, Helga Delisicte?
Yes.
Well, I'm glad to have my first.
In all of Italy.
I'm very glad to be the first.
You are.
You'll be the most memorable by far, too.
Not the unique, I hope.
Very interesting, how this goes.
Yeah, that's great.
It's beautiful, Bonnie, isn't it?
Which one?
Which three is it?
I have to say that you have to say that you want to say that you want to say that?
You want to say that?
I'm not able to make some American.
It's concentrated.
Do you want sugar in it?
Do they usually?
It depends on the taste.
I don't take any sugar but it's just a meter.
Now I bring you the next.
Can we have all kinds of coffee bars now but nothing is authentic.
So have you made a study of bibliophilia, Mr. Chiesa?
No, I haven't.
Because you seem so knowledgeable on the history of it.
No.
I buy every day a lot of books.
Every day you buy?
Not now.
Do people come to the shop?
I just like it black.
Black?
Without children?
Just like that.
Thank you.
Some come in the shop, some I write, some I... I don't have computer.
The computer is not in a ride.
Do you write your own catalogs?
I do two catalogs in my life.
That's it?
I did.
I made one in 53 and the second in 54.
And after it was not necessary, I made special offer to special people.
Well, my goodness.
So when you acquire a book, how do people know that you have it?
Do you call them and say... Listen, I tell you something that I must appreciate you.
The good bookseller, it's not that I mean that I am good in the bookseller, but the good bookseller are booksellers that before
he made choice and after he tried to make business on the choice.
So, this you have two kinds of booksellers.
You have booksellers that are
No, no.
When did all the ships arrive in a, how do you call it, heaven?
Haven.
Haven, yes.
So you have booksellers that are heaven, who arrive.
Where arrive?
Arrive and party.
and leave culture, and is very important, bookseller, and are bookseller that he made only choice, and only choice made business.
So if you want to try a book, to try to find a book on science, for instance,
what you write to Hill or to Norton in the States.
Or Norman in the States.
If you are interested in a Spanish book, you wrote to Gilles in London and in Spain.
If you want French literature, the best are these people.
So it's not that the people come, the good people come to the bookseller.
If you put a renommé, a reputation of special books that you collect,
They know that you have those books.
They know that he has the best, too.
You understand.
But this means also for a great, great bookseller.
I know two booksellers fantastic in London that made business only of a book of Chirkos.
Chirkos.
Do you know what is a circle?
The spectacle of animals and so on.
Circles.
So if you want something on the circle, you must try to be stupid.
Very special.
I know I've observed that he made only mathematics.
And so all mathematics is very knowledge.
Or also children's books.
Yes, or children's books.
But this came more in the past.
Now it's a little less because the books are more rare and the booksellers try to have a little old books.
But I don't buy French book or German book or Spanish book.
I'm very specialized.
Do you ever run across books that are a total surprise to you?
Books that you don't know, but when you see them you say, I have to have them.
They're very important.
Every day.
But you know.
You leave and more you know nothing.
That's crazy.
So you have every day the new experience and after very often you find in the books some new but not novelty.
You must read the book.
In our shop we read the book, so we find very often fantastic news in the book.
News.
Not known.
There are a lot of old books that are Portatrici.
Great books.
New news.
Yes.
If you read, you find extremely interesting news about some that you don't know before.
That's what you talked about too.
That's exactly right.
He was talking about booksellers today and the knowledge of the booksellers in the past helping people.
That's right.
Sorry?
Well, the knowledge of the booksellers.
You said you make a discovery every day.
Yes.
Every day is not right.
It's too much.
But I say that I have
and old books.
I read the books.
You read the books.
And do you have a staff over there?
Yes, yes.
You read the books.
And their responsibility is to read the books that come in?
Yes, he collects, but more because he collects, he reads.
But of course, you must sell complete books or you must collect the books.
Make the collection.
You must make the collection.
But you must read.
Of course, in the books, but it's not, it's ridiculous to read.
but you don't read an edition of Dante Alighieri, of William Shakespeare, but you read of a little scientific man or a collection of letters, old letters of a strange book.
And then how do you, if it's something you've never heard of before, how do you
transmit this knowledge to a prospective client?
I have descriptions.
Every book is with a very long description.
So even though you don't do a catalogue, you do write a full description of every book?
Exactly.
Much more than you find in a catalogue.
Sometimes I read ten pages on a book.
You write ten pages on a book?
That's amazing.
But not in rapport of the price.
For the information.
Father, because I want that somebody that buys books, he knows all what I was able to transmit to him.
But also, for instance,
a librarian or a curator and I made a description of a manuscript.
I must give him more information as possible because he must in five minutes or ten minutes, in this ten page that I write, know
all that I can't transmit all from the book after, because, because our librarian that he knows exactly one text, one problem, but our also librarian that he cannot know all.
So I must give the information to give the possibility
after, to the librarian, to curator, to work easy.
Because you have a study, he starts from my note.
You've got a very good beginning.
You must have a very large reference library.
Sixty thousand.
Are they over here?
Yes.
Also little.
Not only in bibliography, because of course I have all the bibliographies of interest, directly or indirectly, Italian books.
but all the study of a little poet, of a little illustrator, of a neat typograph.
I have so a large study of typographs, Italian typographs,
The French have an expression they use for their collections, they call it, they collect French patrimony.
Patrimony, are you familiar with that word?
Patrimony.
Patrimony, yeah.
Do you do a similar thing in Italy, I wonder?
I think where you collect
It's a national pride.
Items that reflect on your culture, your literature, your heritage.
Of course, the French use that word to keep things in the country that they don't want to leave.
They say, this is a patrimonial item, you know.
a French patrimonial item.
I guess not.
That's okay.
You intend in the patriotic sense, or what?
More than that.
It's like a national treasure and it can't leave the country.
Ah, yes, yes.
Yes, this was in Italy.
You have the sovraintendencia bibliographic.
It's more in Italy than in France.
Really?
Yes.
Could you tell us a little bit about that?
Do you know the bookseller Herbert Tentschert?
Have you ever heard of him, the fellow in Switzerland?
Tentschert.
Yes.
Well, they did it recently.
He's German, but he's in Switzerland.
He lived in Switzerland.
He does these huge catalogues that are quite unbelievable.
But I'm so impressed that you feel that you don't have to do a catalogue.
The book speaks for itself, I guess.
Yes, but the difference is that Tangier is a very rich man, and I am not a very rich man.
Sounds like it's very interesting.
You know what, Connie, do you think that we've... I don't want to try anything.
I know that... No, but... You want to know in each moment for more.
I'm very happy.
I really don't want to oppose it, your hospitality and... No.
You've been very good.
You want a little drink?
I don't think so, actually.
Thank you.
Don't forget, we've been up all night flying, so I think another drink and I'd fall asleep.
You lost the night or you sleep something?
No, it's very difficult to sleep.
It's very exciting to be here, though.
You will sleep tonight.
This is such a treat.
We were talking about this.
I said to my wife, of course, she's been following the itinerary.
And I said we have a special treat in store in Milano.
Are we far from the Arbrosiana?
Not so far.
Ten minutes.
Five minutes.
Oh, really?
I told them I might stop by about three o'clock this afternoon.
And after you go to Arbrosiana?
They're open until 5.30.
You must go.
While you come out here, on your left, put the left, you find him and you.
If you go always, always, always, always straight down,